The inSocialWork® Podcast Series is taking a break for the holidays. This short message, recorded by our hosts, offers holiday wishes on behalf of our team.

In this episode, our guest Dr. Lauren Reed discusses her research on digital dating abuse among adolescents and why females are differentially impacted by this form of dating violence.  She describes how the use of participatory action research has led to effective prevention strategies, and highlights the need to include digital media when assessing for dating violence.

In the second of a two-part episode, our guests Dr. Deb Ortega and Dr. Ashley Hanna discuss the narratives commonly associated with DACA recipients and immigrants, arguing that these narratives need to be reconstructed. They share the more rarely discussed but accurate stories of these individuals, including the trauma and retraumatization they face. Our guests conclude part two by hypothesizing what DACA recipients can expect in the future and what social workers are called to do now.

In this episode, our guest Dr. Kristie Seelman discusses the unique challenges that lesbian, gay, and bisexual older adults face, as well as the need for services that are culturally competent and account for their unique realities. She describes her current research emphasizing coping strategies and differences in mental, cognitive, and physical health among sexual minority older persons.

In the first of a two-part episode, our guests Dr. Deb Ortega and Dr. Ashley Hanna discuss all things DACA (Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals). What is it, who are the people affected, and why does DACA find itself in the political crosshairs? Our guests conclude part one by describing why DACA is a concern for the social work profession and its practitioners.

In this episode, our guest Dr. Joy Learman describes the underlying dynamics that can increase a woman's risk of being HIV-positive and failing to obtain treatment. She discusses her research involving contextual factors and personal experiences of HIV-positive African immigrant women. Dr. Learman emphasizes the need for support for at-risk groups and the development of policies that promote women's reproductive health and decrease their risk of HIV.

In this episode, our guest Janelle Goodwill, MSW, describes her work on the YBMen Project, which studies what is unique about how media affects young black men in college. Exploring their preferences and learning how young black men use media for support, our guest discusses how media affects their mental health and their view of Black masculinity.

Human sex trafficking is the largest illegal trade in the world, and the issue has gain increased attention over the last several years. In this episode, Amber McDonald describes her research involving vulnerable minors' involvement in sex trafficking and the reasons why youth engage in trading and selling sex.  She summarizes current federal legislative initiatives targeting sex trafficking and discusses implications for social work practice.

In part two of a two-part podcast, our guests Dr. Clyde Angel, John Sullivan, and Dr. Vincent Starnino continue their discussion related to spiritual injury and military trauma. They describe the conception and process of creating their program. Observing that traditional evidence-based treatments did not easily address the existential issues they were hearing about from their clients, our guests explain how they developed the key components of their program. Feedback from participants and continuing evaluation efforts conclude the conversation.

In this episode, our guests Dr. Jennifer Cullen and Dr. Jolynn Haney discuss gender differences in the diagnosis and treatment of Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and the reasons why obtaining an accurate diagnosis may be difficult for females. They describe their research involving the socialization process of women diagnosed with ASD within an online community and how social workers can more effectively assist these individuals.