A local newspaper article from Canada in which a social work speaker, Shelley Gilbert, is 
making clear that human trafficking for sex or other exploitation is  
widespread, not just a feature of international cities, and we have to 
be ready to help the victims.

You probably don’t see yourself as a big reader of Ministry
of Defence global strategy documents. Which would be a pity, because a recent
publication gives you a security slant on a lot of global trends. Such as:
countries with more men than women tend to be more violent and authoritarian.
As numbers of women and men become more equal in any society, there is less
violence. China will have an excess of 48 million men in 2045, they guess. Worry about the implications of that.

What does it say about older people? In one stunning
statement, it raises concern that growing numbers of older people will put
pressure on public expenditure and lead to a reduction in defence expenditure. That
is, in rich countries. They’re clearly concerned about this, whereas I think it
would be rather a good thing.

Of course, they note, developing countries don’t provide
welfare, so they’re likely to be all right. No suggestion that improving welfare
services is also likely to be a trend over the next thirty years or so, particularly
where there aren’t any. However, they do have a box for a possible
alternative outcome: 

Ageing populations and increased dependency ratios may
create funding pressures, particularly in developed countries. However,
advances in healthcare and changes in education methods may see the cost of
providing these services fall, as people become healthier, work longer and
education becomes de-centralised.

There are also chapters on gender equality and urbanisation,
where the concerns raised are about security implications of social change, but nowhere the
suggestion that working hard to eradicate the problems that it reasonably identifies
would be the best course of action. I know it’s the Ministry of Defence, and
their job is to make sure that defence is provided for, but actually we’d have a
lot less to worry about if we had better social provision worldwide.

The challenges of being the only social worker in eastern Congo 
This Guardian feature offers a useful picture of social work in a country suffering the consequences of past social disruption and the resulting pressures on individuals and families. Just ideal circumstances to employ social workers in, but obviously a place in which the social priorities mean that providing social care is at the end of the list of things to do. We need to promote the value of services that respond to social need as an important part of any society, even or perhaps especially in countries experiencing great poverty.

A social worker,  Dr Khiswar Dhingra, is reported in a news report from Lahore, Pakistan, commenting on the various disadvantages women experience in the workplace, even though they constitute 40% of the global workforce. This interesting report covers a lot of ground, and it's good to see it coming up in a country that is strongly influenced by Islamic culture that values women in ways that may not help them in the workplace.

In particular, social protection is often less available for women than men to cover disruption in their lives that affects their capacity to work. I often wonder whether the social work concern for good family care bears unreasonably heavily on women than men, and this then disadvantages them in their work. One of the interesting points in the article is that women have more difficulty in meeting high standards in their work lives because of their home responsibilities.

The International social work conference in the summer led to a lot of material on international socila work appearing in the Guardian; one article by a Flemish academic, Joke Knockaert, discusses some of the issues, referring to a Flemish government policy 'Brains on the move', which wants to ensure that one in three Flemish students gets international experience.

But as Gurid Aga Askeland and I argue in our book and articles about globalisation and social work education, it is a naive expectation to think that 'travel broadens the mind' is an appropriate policy in a profession which is partly constructed by policy and legal developments in countries and the cultural expectations in both countries and ethnic and cultural groups.  We have to work hard at expressing our research and understanding in terms that are open enough so that it can be interpreted by people from other cultures into knowledge and understanding that is relevant to them.

Massachusetts social workers are still campaigning over the inefficiencies and poor quality care resulting from high caseloads and inadequate resourcing of social work. they were able to give evidence of a lot of problems to a political audit panel. I don't hear a lot of this sort of evidence coming to political notice in other countries, or locally, but social services are under pressure everywhere.


A campaign called 'Orange Tide' has been trying to defend social services from austerity cuts in Spain, and claims some success in preventing progression to more vicious cuts.

, interpreting developments for British interest.

A social worker recently got into trouble for commenting on what she'd done in a particular case on her Facebook page; the client found this and complained, and the social worker was disciplined by the HCPC. My own view is that it's wrong to discuss a client's situation in anything but highly anonymised form, and for reasons of professional development (e.g. education or progressing the profession), not letting off steam in a personal way.

. (While this is mainly just a brief summary of the HCPC decision, there are some interesting comments from various readers at the end).

There's HCPC guidance on using social media sites. 

A lengthy commentary on the 'social work helper' webpage, although not well-written, gives some useful practical guidance, and and the British Association of Social Workers has a useful if sketchy policy.

Sara Ashencaen Crabtree and Jonathan Parker talk in this article about training people in Myanmar (the country we often know as Burma), who are just grappling with social work as a new part of society. As they say:

Participants didn’t realise that something as seemingly humble as 
working with the lowly and underprivileged could be counted as a 
profession. The idea of international standards and principles 
underpinning this work was also a revelation.
This is a point that Gurid Aga Askeland, in particular, has often made in her commentaries on teaching social work across the world in countries where it is completely new. She argues that we should be trying to present our material in ways that can be interpreted into the cultural life of the country, rather than being experts from afar just retailing what Western countries do. This is certainly what Sara and Jonathan did, as you can see from their account.

 (that I made a contribution to). It downloads a pdf. You could also look at our book, published by Ashgate (and in a Chinese translation):  .

People who read my Facebook pages may have been wondering about the subject of the PhD that Natalia Holvova has been awarded, since on Facebook I concentrated on the feeling of relief and celebration that always follows the successful completion of years of work. As is often the case with PhD exams in mainland Europe, Natalia had not only to produce a thesis, but the examination was by a sizeable committee meeting in public (although unlike some I've been involved in there was no massive audience) and involved giving a lecture about the project (see the picture of Natalia in action). 

Natalia's research was on alcoholism among young people, and the research project involved interviewing your people in their school setting about their experience of alcohol, providing them with some groupwork about the problems of using alcohol inappropriately, retesting them about any changed attitudes and also interviewing their teachers. One of the striking outcomes for me was how disfranchised the teachers felt in dealing with social problems faced by their students and in trying to engage parents. This made a strong case for having school social workers.

School social work is quite an interest in Slovakia at the moment, probably for this reason, although provision is very patchy, not to say absent. The Journal Czech and Slovak Social Work has an English edition annually, and the 2013 edition had an article by Tatiana Matulayova and Ilona Pesatova on Social Workers in Schools, which you can access on the internet:

 in Czech and Slovak Republics (click on 'download a sample' and scroll through the articles).

There was a whole edition on school social work earlier in 2013, but most of it was in Czech, and you have to buy it.

The Daily News in Egypt carries an article about a new law for NGOs, that is voluntary organisations and charities. You can see from the previous articles on this subject that the present article links to, that there was a lot of criticism of the proposals for such a law by the previous administration, under the President Morsi, who was given the bum's rush by the present regime. Underneath all the political shenanigans, of course, administration goes on, and this is a sign of it in an area of interest to social workers. However, it seems that human rights organisations are just as concerned now as in the past about what might be going to happen. Keeping civil society going is a crucial part of any social settlement and in the end if you don't allow people to participate genuinely in doing things to help others and raise issues of concern in their own society, you can't credibly claim to be governing in the interest of the people.

An interesting article in the Hindustan Times tells you about contributions made by students at the Delhi School of Social Work: help with the Himalayan flash floods and setting up a gender reso
urce centre.

A new book arrives from the Czech Republic, and usefully provides information about social work education in both the Czech and Slovak Republics.
But the major contribution is an extended paper about postmodernity and social work by the respected Czech academic, Libor Musil. This addresses the concern shared by scoial workers across the world that their profession is not held in the high level of respect that they might wish. Why is this? He argues that the traditional view in which professions attain respect for their valued contribution to society needs to be replaced by our understanding that the legitimacy of our role (and indeed that of all professions) needs to be constantly renegotiated in response to changing social conditions.

