Between 2001 and 2015, more than 540,000 Americans died from suicide. Although the majority of deaths from suicide occur in urban areas, rates of suicide for rural populations, who face significant barriers to accessing mental health services, have remained higher over the past decade.

This toolkit is meant for anyone who feels there is a lack of productive discourse around issues of diversity and the role of identity in social relationships, both on a micro (individual) and macro (communal) level.

What if by using a combination of social science and artificial intelligence, we could learn to identify whether someone is becoming a suicide risk by predicting when they are thinking about it?

Bridges have always attracted people who want to jump to their deaths. Can social workers and new technologies intervene and help save lives?

According to the Department of Defense, about 1,300 military service members, spouses and children transition into civilian communities each day, but the majority of veterans have trouble adjusting to civilian life, which can lead to joblessness, homelessness and untreated mental health conditions.

In a   published in late July, President Trump announced that the U.S. military would no longer allow transgender men and women to serve in any capacity. The president cited medical costs and distractions to military focus as the reasons behind his surprise announcement, despite a  by the RAND National Defense Research Institute that counters these claims.

To help identify some of the challenges for those living with a mental illness, the MSW@USC created three infographics that provide a snapshot of what mental illness looks like in America, how mental illness and substance use are related, and what barriers exist for people in need of treatment.

USC professor Sara Kintzle sits down with the MSW@USC to preview the State of The American Veteran Conference.

Compared to the general youth population, LGBTQ youth are more likely to struggle with depression, develop suicidal ideation, contract HIV, become homeless and experience physical violence. As we celebrate Pride Month this June, let’s reflect on critical issues that young LGBTQ people continue to face as they navigate one of the most challenging times in their lives.

The MSW@USC sat down with Erin Hanssen, an admissions counselor for our online MSW program. Erin holds her MSW and has worked for the MSW@USC for three years.

As part of the application process for the USC Suzanne Dworak-Peck School of Social Work, prospective students are required to submit their resume. Following are three tips to keep in mind to help ensure your resume is both high quality and effective.

 Combatting the spread of human trafficking requires first recognizing the scope of the problem. To help facilitate the conversation around ending human trafficking, the USC Suzanne Dworak-Peck School of Social Work created the following guide that offers an in-depth look at the areas where trafficking is most prevalent, the forms of exploitation that exist, and the root causes of this epidemic.

In the weeks leading up to All School Day 2017, USC Suzanne Dworak-Peck School of Social Work professors and students engaged in a discussion about poverty and its effect on human rights by using the hashtag #ASD17. View a recap of the live Tweet chat.

The DSW@USC called on Drs. Marvin Southard, Herbert Hatanaka and Jacquelyn McCroskey to talk about the impact that earning their DSW has had on their careers. Not only do they each hold a DSW degree, but they are also USC professors who understand what sets the DSW@USC apart from other Doctor of Social Work programs.

Social workers have a unique role to play in helping to eradicate poverty and ultimately ensure the rights of people worldwide. The USC Suzanne Dworak-Peck School of Social Work is leading a conversation on poverty and its effect on human rights by hosting an open dialogue at this year’s All School Day (ASD).

Robert Weiss, a licensed clinical social worker, examines what factors make a person more or less likely to successfully negotiate the landscape of intimate emotional connection in today’s digital world.

As we recognize Human Trafficking Awareness Day, the USC Suzanne Dworak-Peck School of Social Work acknowledges the need for greater public education around the practice of human trafficking in order to help aid the more than 20 million victims who live as modern-day slaves. 

Dean of the USC Suzanne Dworak-Peck School of Social Work, Marilyn Flynn, recently published a letter addressing the presidential election results and how important the social work community will be during the next four years.

Whether a challenge is professional or personal, people need to be mentally strong in order to push through and overcome it. The increased level of support that social workers provide for clients only heightens this need.

The  invites you to participate in You Matter, a grassroots campaign designed to foster well-being and bring back some much-needed human connection. Use our Care Cards to tell someone why they matter to you...
 
A Master of Social Work opens many doors — including the one to the schoolhouse. Professionals who read between the lines and care unconditionally can find great satisfaction in school social work, providing critical guidance to the next generation of students.

As the fastest growing population in the country, older adults face both opportunities and challenges. The support of seniors, especially those who are low-income, is an important consideration for social workers. While living in poverty is a challenge no matter your age, older adults who live in poverty struggle with an array of issues unique to their phase of life.

The USC Suzanne Dworak-Peck School of Social Work is excited to announce the new online Doctor of Social Work (DSW@USC) program. Dr. Marvin Southard, the program chair, sat down with us to talk about what drew him to the DSW@USC program and what he expects the program to bring to the field of social work. 

If you’re interested in helping those who are sick or suffering from chronic illness, you might want to consider a career in medical social work. Medical social workers help their clients address the challenges of illness, such as navigating the health care system, discussing treatment options, and working with an interdisciplinary medical team to coordinate the best possible care.

The shooting at UCLA on June 1 marks the 182nd school shooting in the United States since the mass shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School, where Adam Lanza killed 20 children and six adults in December 2012 in Newtown, Connecticut.

The University of Southern California is pleased to introduce its new online . The first of its kind, the DSW@USC is designed to prepare scholar-practitioners to harness innovative solutions to solve real-world problems.

In the weeks leading up to All School Day 2016, “,” USC School of Social Work professors and students, members of the public, and expert speakers engaged in a discussion about gun violence as a public health issue by using the hashtag #ASD16. Watch a recording of the live All School Day event and read a recap of the live tweet chat here!

There’s nothing like curling up with a good book during the cold winter months. The hardest part is choosing which book. We thought we’d make that a little easier for you by compiling a list of books every social worker should read and reasons why they are worth your time.
 
Social work is one of those careers in which you can truly make a difference in people’s lives. A Master of Social Work degree can open many doors and show others you have not only the knowledge and the skills, but also the compassion and dedication necessary to work in such an important field.

According to a published report from the , the United States has seen a massive uptick in mass shootings since the year 2000. In an effort to address and eradicate gun violence, doctors, public health practitioners, social workers and others are  In response, the USC School of Social Work is leading a conversation on gun violence by hosting an open dialogue at this year’s All School Day (ASD). 
On January 14 at the  (SSWR) annual conference, the  (AASWSW) announced the . Championed by USC School of Social Work Dean Marilyn Flynn, this initiative aims to invigorate social progress by using science and research to crack the most serious societal ills that social work can — and should — address.

For many, the holiday season is their favorite time of year. But the holidays can also be a chaotic, stressful and exhausting time. Here’s our go-to guide to making them happy and stress free.

Melissa Singh is an adjunct lecturer teaching Field Seminar and Virtual Field Practicum with the MSW@USC. With more than five years of field instruction experience, Melissa has the inside perspective on supporting students through their field education. She has shared her experience with us here.

At the MSW@USC, our field placement team works with you to find a placement where you will be supervised and mentored by professional social workers who support your education and develop your practice skills. The five agencies that follow are just a handful of our amazing partners.

The USC School of Social Work prides itself on its MSW@USC faculty. Each of our faculty members is acclaimed in the field of social work, with years of experience both inside and outside the classroom. MSW@USC faculty members are prepared to teach a rigorous curriculum and train you to be an agent of change. Meet five of our inspirational professors below.

MSW@USC graduates leave our program ready to create significant change in their communities and throughout the world. Our rigorous curriculum prepares students to be leaders in social work, and the variety of our focused concentration areas allows students to individualize their coursework based on their own unique goals and aspirations.

Social work is a fast-growing field, composed of intelligent and emotionally strong professionals that represent the populations with the most need. It is a profession that historically produces agents of change who are not afraid to challenge antiquated policies, fight for social justice, and make the world a better place. Below are five of many reasons why social workers do what they do, and enact the change they want to see in the world.

Eating disorders are not only the , but also the least understood. To those who don’t understand anorexia, bulimia and other eating disorders, the symptoms are perplexing. Unfortunately, the misconceptions and stigma attached to eating disorders causes many sufferers to go undiagnosed and untreated.

Abbe Studer shares her story of losing her husband to depression and suicide and reminds us that getting help for mental illness is not something to be ashamed of.
[My husband] felt that he should have been able to pull himself out of it. That he should have been able to rebound on his own, and that therapy and medicine were for the weak. I stood beside him until the end. As his illnesses grew, my depression grew. I did not realize that I was suffering from anxiety. I was too busy taking care of him to take care of myself.

While most professors opt for a traditional, deliverable final exam, two University of Southern California Master of Social Work professors decided to take a different approach.
 

Today we feature our student Elizabeth Steffel, a foster youth advocate who was inspired to help others based on her own experience in and out of the system.

If you are planning for a career in the social services, you have a few options for which degree to pursue.

Jabari Evans, MSW ’14, also known by his hip-hop name, Naledge, has released his new song and music video, “Push the Limit,” in support of education and his alma mater, the USC School of Social Work, and its online master’s degree program...

Last May, we featured , a 2014 MSW@USC graduate who had big plans for his hometown of Chicago. We are always proud of the work our alumni do with their , and we followed up with Jabari to see what he’s been up to since graduation...

Between 25 and 40 percent of people with eating disorders are males (Hudson, 2007). Because of the stigma associated with having a “women’s problem,” however, many men and boys who are suffering with eating disorders do not receive appropriate treatment and may even be...

This submission to the  was written by Jamie Ottesen, BSW, MSW, LCSW. Jamie is a licensed clinical social worker and is going on two years of recovery from bulimia and food addiction. She can be reached at rockingresilience@gmail.com...

The roles social workers fulfill are always changing, and a great example of this is their greater presence in the world of business. There is more crossover than ever before, and the MSW@USC prepares students to take on these new challenges through its ...

Allison Epstein is the managing editor at Adios Barbie, a body-image blogger at The Body Pacifist, a fiction writer and Renaissance drama enthusiast. She writes about eating disorders, the media and feminism. Allison has a degree in English, creative writing and French from the University of Michigan...

Mental illness awareness and prevention received renewed focus after the creation of the Affordable Care Act, which expanded requirements for mental health coverage via federal protections. For more than 65 years, May has marked...

For the past four years, the USC School of Social Work has participated in the Tour de Cure, a series of fundraising cycling events held to benefit the American Diabetes Association. USC organized Los Angeles-area teams in previous years, but this year...

The conversations at this year’s All School Day about race relations and the recent 50th anniversary of the Selma, Alabama, “Bloody Sunday” march inspire us to reflect on our country’s civil rights progress and those who give us courage to stand up for social injustices...

Spread the word! March is National Social Work Month. Sponsored by the National Association of Social Workers (NASW), this annual celebration recognizes the contributions of the nation’s more than 600,000 social workers...

The wealth gap between America’s upper-income and middle-income families has reached a record high. According to a recent analysis, in 2013, the median wealth of the nation’s upper-income families was nearly seven times the median wealth of middle-income families...

Our legal system was designed to promote fairness and work for justice. However, people of color, especially black men, are arrested and tried at higher rates than whites. Once they are arrested, blacks are disproportionately more likely to go to jail for the same crime whites commit...

The University of Southern California School of Social Work and the MSW@USC invite you to join All School Day 2015 on Wednesday, Feb. 25, at 9 a.m. PST/noon EST. This year’s theme is “Race Relations in the 21st Century: Is it Just a Black and White Issue?”..

We all have a personal mental health story. Your personal story could be intertwined with mental illness, trauma, domestic violence or a host of other issues. Here are just a few statistics that illustrate the prevalence of some pressing issues that may have touched your life...

As of October 31, Ebola has and one person in the U.S. But despite our safety to date,that public fear and confusion in the U.S. are growing as state and the federal governments bicker over quarantines, treatment protocols and travel policies...

Christine Bader, author of The Evolution of a Corporate Idealist: When Girl Meets Oil, poses this question in her recent post for . In it, Bader makes a case for the master’s in social work degree by outlining the value it can bring in business settings, as well as the rising demand for more corporate social work...

As an instructor at USC, I enjoy utilizing our rich community resources in Los Angeles, California, where 200 languages are spoken and 21 ethnic enclaves live, and developing case studies to teach theoretical and conceptual Community Organization, Planning and Administration concentration courses to students...
 

A guide to websites, toolkits and other resources for understanding, preventing and combating bullying. According to the , “Bullying is a form of aggressive behavior in which someone intentionally and repeatedly causes another person injury or discomfort...

This post was submitted to the 100 Voices for Suicide Prevention campaign by the . YSPP is a prevention education organization focused on reducing suicidal behaviors among Washington State’s youth. They work towards this goal by providing programs and services to raise public awareness, , and support  to confront the issues of suicide and self-violence.

Every 40 seconds the world loses someone to suicide. This grim statistic is being challenged every day by mental health advocates and practitioners. USC School of Social Work believes that suicide awareness and prevention work is of paramount importance...

To commemorate  the  collaborated with over 45 experts nationwide in order to build the “” Campaign. One of the goals of Suicide Prevention Month is to inspire people to get involved...

The following post was submitted to the 100 Voices for Suicide Prevention campaign by Paul Quinnett, PhD, President and CEO, . A clinical psychologist and trainer for more than 35 years, Dr. Quinnett developed and managed a suicide prevention hotline, an emergency services department, and a dozen mental health service delivery programs...

The following post was submitted to the 100 Voices for Suicide Prevention campaign by the  1-877-726-4727. The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) is the agency within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services that leads public health efforts to advance the behavioral health of the nation...

The following post was submitted to the 100 Voices for Suicide Prevention campaign by . Working Minds provides tools and networks to workplaces to assist with suicide prevention, intervention, and postvention. Because the majority of people who complete suicide are of working age, and because workplaces, like schools, are an appropriate and effective venue for addressing the public health issue, Working Minds seeks to engage workplace communities...

