As members of the SocialWork@Simmons community, our backgrounds are unique, with a shared dedication for our work and for the Simmons School of Social Work. What does social work mean to each of us? Why did we become social workers? Why did we join the SocialWork@Simmons community? “Why I Do It” tells these stories. 

When exploring graduate , it’s important for students to explore their options for academic support. At SocialWork@Simmons, we take a unique approach to academic advising that benefits our students both academically and personally throughout their time in the program.

As the ongoing civil war in Syria drove steady growth in the global refugee population, the number of new refugees admitted to the United States increased significantly in calendar year 2016. With lawmakers, advocates, and the general public debating how best to address refugees, it is important to first and foremost recognize who they are and where they are coming from.

Whether you are a new SocialWork@Simmons student, current applicant, or learning about the program for the first time, it’s never too early to begin planning for success. Rigorous graduate-level social work study prepares students to become highly qualified professionals, but it requires careful planning and dedication.

Individuals with a mental health illness in the United States can face fragmented or unavailable services, high costs, and social stigma. It is particularly difficult for people of color to receive adequate and culturally appropriate treatment.

As most social work students learn, the diagnosis of “homosexuality” was removed from the Diagnostic Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) in 1973 by the board of the directors of the American Psychiatric Association. After this, strength-based, positive therapeutic frameworks such as Gay Affirmative Therapy, were introduced as ethical alternatives to conversion, reparative and aversion therapies.

isn’t just about eating right, exercising, and getting enough sleep. While important, these elements only scratch the surface of an intentional and successful wellness plan. Maintaining physical, mental, and emotional health is vital for everyone, but it can be particularly important for those working in helping professions like social work, nursing, and counseling.

To highlight the supportive and collaborative community that awaits prospective SocialWork@Simmons students, we are publishing a series of blog posts that feature many of our student life offerings.

The child welfare field is a traditional career path within the social work profession. While some people may hold an unfortunate stereotype about child protection workers — imagining child welfare social workers dramatically ripping children away from their families — this notion is far from the truth.

The face of American homelessness is changing — into an older one. People 50 and older make up more than 30 percent of the nation’s homeless population. The growing number of older homeless people has altered the most pressing concerns unique and specific to the American homeless population.

The Welcome Project helps ensure that immigrants are not pushed to the margins but included in all aspects of civic life. Giving immigrants access to the tools they need to succeed, like education, empowers them to find their own unique role in their new community.

Suicide is the 10th-leading cause of death in the United States. For children, teens and young adults ages 10 to 24, it is the second-leading cause of death. In recent years, suicide prevention and intervention apps have been designed for those at risk of suicide, as well as for parents and health care providers.

To highlight the supportive and collaborative community that awaits prospective SocialWork@Simmons students, we are publishing a series of blog posts that feature many of our student life offerings.

As the number of refugees seeking a new home increases worldwide due to conflicts in countries such as Syria, so too does the need for social workers who understand the unique challenges of this population. Although many support services focus on the physical needs of refugees, social workers and health care practitioners must be better prepared to address the mental health needs of these populations. 

The decision to pursue graduate school is not one to take lightly. Many graduate students, need a support system to help them navigate the challenges that accompany the decision. While many students are able to rely on the expertise and knowledge of families members who preceded them and pursued higher education, students who are the first in their families to go to college — and to pursue graduate education — must rely on others for guidance on how to navigate academia.

When prisoners in the United States are released, they face an environment that is challenging and actively deters them from becoming productive members of society. Often viewed as sub-citizens, ex-offenders are perpetually punished for crimes. The causes of these restrictions are systemic and affect ex-offenders at all levels of society.

SocialWork@Simmons hosted its first online student awards ceremony on Thursday, May 26, 2016. Five awards were presented to students in the online Master of Social Work program for excellence in academics, practice in their field placement, and service to the Simmons online community. 

Dr. Grossman Leeman said she believes that “by being involved in participatory governance, social workers learn how to become advocates,” and through the Student Advisory Board, students are able to gain experience meeting with authority figures and advocating for others.

At SocialWork@Simmons, we take great pride in myriad student life opportunities we offer our students. As an online degree program, we are invested in ensuring that our students — no matter where they are located — feel connected and part of the Simmons community.

Social work is a rapidly growing field with a wide range of career possibilities. During the next 10 years, the  expects nearly twice as many new social work jobs to be created as compared to the national average for all occupations. A Master of Social Work (MSW) is the gateway to most professional opportunities in the field, but new MSW graduates face some choices. Most MSW graduates complete coursework in a wide range of subjects, including clinical practice, social policy, human behavior, research, advocacy, and specific populations such as children or older adults.
 

After years of hard work focused on field placements, process recordings, and group projects, you’ve earned your Master of Social Work (MSW) and are ready to enter the field as a professional. The next step, finding the right job, is crucial. To help you in your job search, we have compiled the following tips to help you gain confidence and enter interviews feeling prepared.
 

With , social workers specializing in the area are in high demand. Substance abuse social workers use their specialized knowledge to help those struggling with drug and alcohol abuse to cope and make a full recovery.

As the cold winter months take hold, homeless individuals become increasingly vulnerable to health risks such as frostbite, hypothermia, and even death. If you’re interested in getting involved, you’re in the right place. This guide will expand on the dangers of being homeless in freezing temperatures and provide some practical tips to take action this winter.
 

SocialWork@Simmons provides students multiple opportunities to connect in deep and meaningful ways with their peers and faculty.  In addition to face-to-face live class sessions, SocialWork@Simmons students engage with members of the community through a variety of ways including participation in an array of student life, mentoring, and enrichment opportunities. Learn more: 

Brian Prester was working as a flight instructor in pursuit of a career as an airline pilot when health issues forced him to re-evaluate his life and career goals. In doing so, he realized the call to social work. Brian decided to pursue a graduate degree in social work to gain the knowledge and skills necessary not only to become a helping professional, but also to become an effective social change agent.

Are you interested in becoming a forensic social worker? You can position yourself to enter the field by applying social work practice principals within the context of the legal system. Learn more... 

We sat down with Simmons School of Social Work professor Michele Putnam to discuss her experience in social work involving older adult and geriatric populations. The following is her full interview. 

We sat down with Simmons School of Social Work professor Kristie Thomas, PhD, MSW to discuss her work in the domestic violence space, her research, and her professional experiences. The following is a full transcript of our conversation.

A student spotlight featuring MSW student Marian Arceo.

Elianne Ramos is the principal and CEO of  and founder of the Border Kids Relief Project. Known online as @ERGeekGoddess, she is an award-winning, nationally recognized social entrepreneur and Latino community advocate.

David Leopold practices immigration law in Cleveland, Ohio. He is an immigration reform advocate and past president of the American Immigration Lawyers Association.

Social work conferences are a great way to continue your social work education, but also offer some informal perks that can help you advance your career. With this in mind, we’ve put together a list of some of the biggest upcoming social work conferences.

The following are some of the "first voices" and initial submissions we have received in response to our #MoreThanALabel: Immigrant Stories campaign. 

Whether you’re looking for your first social work job or you’re hoping to make a career shift, your resume will highlight your skills, experiences, and assets. Crafting a social work resume that makes prospective employers interested in meeting you is the first step in finding the right job.

As child advocate, social worker, and author Frank Kros explains, many of the answers lie in the neuroscience of poverty. He wants professionals who work with children to understand poverty’s effects on young people’s brains, feel its impact on their lives, and act to repair its damage.

What is it?#MoreThanALabel is a blog carnival and social campaign aimed at raising the voices of those within the immigrant community. We are asking bloggers and social advocates alike to …

There are many scholarships and grants available to social work graduate students that can lighten the financial load. Following is a list of some of those scholarship and grant opportunities.

One day I was driving home from work listening to the radio. There was a story on recent employment trends. One of the guests on the radio show began to …

Name: Alberto ChangProgram Type: ExtendedHometown: Boston, MassachusettsSocialWork@Simmons student Alberto Chang is pursuing his MSW with a Child and Family specialization to become a psychotherapist. Originally from Boston, he has a …

If you’re interested in a career helping others, counseling and social work are two fields you may be considering. While they share similarities, there are many differences between the two …

Navigating the dialogue that surrounds gender and sexuality can be difficult. The terminology used by and for individuals along the gender spectrum is specific, and preferred usage can vary from …

Many dedicated social service professionals work very closely with foster care agencies or with children within the foster care system. We have created this graphic in an effort to continue …

Mary Haddock-Staniland is an energetic, larger than life, passionate, and out-there New Zealander. Her magnetic personality, sense of humour, infectious laugh, and extraordinary wit has made her a force to …

In our newest campaign Trans*forming the Dialogue, we reached out to people who identify as transgender and transgender allies to help us by offering their perspective on how we can …

SocialWork@Simmons is proud to announce the launch of: Trans*forming the Dialogue! In honor of LGBT Pride Month and in an effort to continue to celebrate Simmons’ commitment to fostering inclusivity …

All social workers are beholden to the Social Work Code of Ethics —otherwise known as the National Association of Social Workers (NASW) Code of Ethics — during their studies and …

Lillian Aguirre is a SocialWork@Simmons student from Las Vegas, Nevada, where she has lived for eight years. She earned her bachelor’s degree in social work from the University of Las Vegas Nevada, and is currently the program company manager for a private company that provides in-home services to families who have children with autism...

Dr. Joanna Almeida is currently an assistant professor at the Simmons College School of Social Work where she teaches “Human Behavior in the Social Environment.” She holds a Master of Social Work (M.S.W.) and Master of Public Health (M.P.H.) from Boston University, and she earned a Doctor of Science (Sc.D.) from the Harvard School of Public Health...

